[[testcontext-ctx-management-property-sources]]
= Context Configuration with Test Property Sources

The TODAY Framework has first-class support for the notion of an environment with a
hierarchy of property sources, and you can configure integration tests with test-specific
property sources. In contrast to the `@PropertySource` annotation used on
`@Configuration` classes, you can declare the `@TestPropertySource` annotation on a test
class to declare resource locations for test properties files or inlined properties.
These test property sources are added to the set of `PropertySources` in the
`Environment` for the `ApplicationContext` loaded for the annotated integration test.

[NOTE]
====
You can use `@TestPropertySource` with any implementation of the `SmartContextLoader`
SPI, but `@TestPropertySource` is not supported with implementations of the older
`ContextLoader` SPI.

Implementations of `SmartContextLoader` gain access to merged test property source values
through the `getPropertySourceDescriptors()` and `getPropertySourceProperties()` methods in
`MergedContextConfiguration`.
====

[[declaring-test-property-sources]]
== Declaring Test Property Sources

You can configure test properties files by using the `locations` or `value` attribute of
`@TestPropertySource`.

By default, both traditional and XML-based `java.util.Properties` file formats are
supported -- for example, `"classpath:/com/example/test.properties"` or
`"file:///path/to/file.xml"`. As of TODAY Framework 6.1, you can configure a custom
`PropertySourceFactory` via the `factory` attribute in `@TestPropertySource` in order to
support a different file format such as JSON, YAML, etc.

Each path is interpreted as a Infra `Resource`. A plain path (for example,
`"test.properties"`) is treated as a classpath resource that is relative to the package
in which the test class is defined. A path starting with a slash is treated as an
absolute classpath resource (for example: `"/org/example/test.xml"`). A path that
references a URL (for example, a path prefixed with `classpath:`, `file:`, or `http:`) is
loaded by using the specified resource protocol.

Property placeholders in paths (such as `${...}`) will be resolved against the `Environment`.

As of TODAY Framework 6.1, resource location patterns are also supported — for
example, `"classpath*:/config/*.properties"`.

The following example uses a test properties file:

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@ContextConfiguration
@TestPropertySource("/test.properties") // <1>
class MyIntegrationTests {
  // class body...
}
----
<1> Specifying a properties file with an absolute path.

======


You can configure inlined properties in the form of key-value pairs by using the
`properties` attribute of `@TestPropertySource`, as shown in the next example. All
key-value pairs are added to the enclosing `Environment` as a single test
`PropertySource` with the highest precedence.

The supported syntax for key-value pairs is the same as the syntax defined for entries in
a Java properties file:

* `key=value`
* `key:value`
* `key value`

[TIP]
====
Although properties can be defined using any of the above syntax variants and any number
of spaces between the key and the value, it is recommended that you use one syntax
variant and consistent spacing within your test suite — for example, consider always
using `key = value` instead of `key= value`, `key=value`, etc. Similarly, if you define
inlined properties using text blocks you should consistently use text blocks for inlined
properties throughout your test suite.

The reason is that the exact strings you provide will be used to determine the key for
the context cache. Consequently, to benefit from the context cache you must ensure that
you define inlined properties consistently.
====

The following example sets two inlined properties:

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@ContextConfiguration
@TestPropertySource(properties = {"timezone = GMT", "port = 4242"}) // <1>
class MyIntegrationTests {
  // class body...
}
----
<1> Setting two properties via an array of strings.

======

As of TODAY Framework 6.1, you can use _text blocks_ to define multiple inlined
properties in a single `String`. The following example sets two inlined properties using
a text block:

[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@ContextConfiguration
@TestPropertySource(properties = """
  timezone = GMT
  port = 4242
  """) // <1>
class MyIntegrationTests {
  // class body...
}
----
<1> Setting two properties via a text block.


[NOTE]
====
As of TODAY Framework 5.2, `@TestPropertySource` can be used as _repeatable annotation_.
That means that you can have multiple declarations of `@TestPropertySource` on a single
test class, with the `locations` and `properties` from later `@TestPropertySource`
annotations overriding those from previous `@TestPropertySource` annotations.

In addition, you may declare multiple composed annotations on a test class that are each
meta-annotated with `@TestPropertySource`, and all of those `@TestPropertySource`
declarations will contribute to your test property sources.

Directly present `@TestPropertySource` annotations always take precedence over
meta-present `@TestPropertySource` annotations. In other words, `locations` and
`properties` from a directly present `@TestPropertySource` annotation will override the
`locations` and `properties` from a `@TestPropertySource` annotation used as a
meta-annotation.
====


[[default-properties-file-detection]]
== Default Properties File Detection

If `@TestPropertySource` is declared as an empty annotation (that is, without explicit
values for the `locations` or `properties` attributes), an attempt is made to detect a
default properties file relative to the class that declared the annotation. For example,
if the annotated test class is `com.example.MyTest`, the corresponding default properties
file is `classpath:com/example/MyTest.properties`. If the default cannot be detected, an
`IllegalStateException` is thrown.

[[precedence]]
== Precedence

Test properties have higher precedence than those defined in the operating system's
environment, Java system properties, or property sources added by the application
declaratively by using `@PropertySource` or programmatically. Thus, test properties can
be used to selectively override properties loaded from system and application property
sources. Furthermore, inlined properties have higher precedence than properties loaded
from resource locations. Note, however, that properties registered via
xref:testing/testcontext-framework/ctx-management/dynamic-property-sources.adoc[`@DynamicPropertySource`] have
higher precedence than those loaded via `@TestPropertySource`.

In the next example, the `timezone` and `port` properties and any properties defined in
`"/test.properties"` override any properties of the same name that are defined in system
and application property sources. Furthermore, if the `"/test.properties"` file defines
entries for the `timezone` and `port` properties those are overridden by the inlined
properties declared by using the `properties` attribute. The following example shows how
to specify properties both in a file and inline:

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@ContextConfiguration
@TestPropertySource(
  locations = "/test.properties",
  properties = {"timezone = GMT", "port = 4242"}
)
class MyIntegrationTests {
  // class body...
}
----
======

[[inheriting-and-overriding-test-property-sources]]
== Inheriting and Overriding Test Property Sources

`@TestPropertySource` supports boolean `inheritLocations` and `inheritProperties`
attributes that denote whether resource locations for properties files and inlined
properties declared by superclasses should be inherited. The default value for both flags
is `true`. This means that a test class inherits the locations and inlined properties
declared by any superclasses. Specifically, the locations and inlined properties for a
test class are appended to the locations and inlined properties declared by superclasses.
Thus, subclasses have the option of extending the locations and inlined properties. Note
that properties that appear later shadow (that is, override) properties of the same name
that appear earlier. In addition, the aforementioned precedence rules apply for inherited
test property sources as well.

If the `inheritLocations` or `inheritProperties` attribute in `@TestPropertySource` is
set to `false`, the locations or inlined properties, respectively, for the test class
shadow and effectively replace the configuration defined by superclasses.

NOTE: As of TODAY Framework 5.3, test configuration may also be inherited from enclosing
classes. See xref:testing/testcontext-framework/support-classes.adoc#testcontext-junit-jupiter-nested-test-configuration[`@Nested` test class configuration] for details.

In the next example, the `ApplicationContext` for `BaseTest` is loaded by using only the
`base.properties` file as a test property source. In contrast, the `ApplicationContext`
for `ExtendedTest` is loaded by using the `base.properties` and `extended.properties`
files as test property source locations. The following example shows how to define
properties in both a subclass and its superclass by using `properties` files:

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@TestPropertySource("base.properties")
@ContextConfiguration
class BaseTest {
  // ...
}

@TestPropertySource("extended.properties")
@ContextConfiguration
class ExtendedTest extends BaseTest {
  // ...
}
----
======

In the next example, the `ApplicationContext` for `BaseTest` is loaded by using only the
inlined `key1` property. In contrast, the `ApplicationContext` for `ExtendedTest` is
loaded by using the inlined `key1` and `key2` properties. The following example shows how
to define properties in both a subclass and its superclass by using inline properties:

[tabs]
======
Java::
+
[source,java,indent=0,subs="verbatim,quotes",role="primary"]
----
@TestPropertySource(properties = "key1 = value1")
@ContextConfiguration
class BaseTest {
  // ...
}

@TestPropertySource(properties = "key2 = value2")
@ContextConfiguration
class ExtendedTest extends BaseTest {
  // ...
}
----
======

